In these five aggregates, the Buddha explains that this is the source of suffering, ultimately.
We freeze things and prevent movement.
In fact, it's about realizing that we must allow freedom to happen.
In these five aggregates, the first aggregate is form, phenomenology, phenomena.
phenomena.
The second aggregate is sensations.
Once the body is there, it is invited to feel.
The Buddha explained that the body is something that must be truly understood
as something impermanent, but interdependent.
We can almost imagine that our own game, since we can imagine
as we want ultimately,
it would be as big as the Earth.
It's already interesting to say, it gives us a kind of responsibility.
So the idea is that this body, this form, it's like when you go to the sea and you
have foam, you see, on the beach, like that, and that it's something
that moves, but you come back an hour later, it's no longer there, it's
gone, then it comes back, and so it's continuously changing, so
it's about understanding this continuous movement.
The second skandha is...
the skandha of sensation.
And there, you can notice
that the world of sensation,
it's a world of sensations
where ultimately things are pleasant,
Sometimes, a sensation that is pleasant
can, after a certain time,
become unpleasant.
Or even the opposite.
It's about observing.
The Buddha, he gives an image,
he says, you must understand
that it's like...
soap bubbles, you blow them, the
sensation appears,
and then at some point, it disappears.
But what do we do? We "grasp", as they say,
we attach ourselves, I appropriate it.
But it's not possible, since everything is still impermanent.
And so we create an attachment to something that no longer exists.
You have people like that who have had an unpleasant event.
certainly in the past
but they keep reactivating it in their present
so I give an image
like that, a bit strong, it's as if you had
a good fart
in a small dome
like that, you see
that's 10 years old, you see
and every day you open it and you
oh, you're going to smell the bad odor
we reactivate patterns like that
that are past
because in fact we have fixed them
We got attached or we rejected them.
And I always say, letting go is not that.
That's abandonment.
Letting go is this.
I let go.
And I promise you it won't stay there much longer.
There will be a time when it will leave.
Unless I want to keep the little fart.
Oh, damn!
Third skandha, third aggregate, these are perceptions.
And perceptions, it's really the image of the mirage,
where I take and project onto the other, for example, my patterns of satisfaction.
What interests me is that I want to see the pattern of your mind, how
it happens.
Like for example, earlier in meditation, they arrived a few minutes.
on time. And
I'm sure, me, at the beginning, before, when I started, it would have annoyed me.
I would have seen my mind, but how dare they and why do they come in? Me
I saw, I made
a sign, we're going to disturb them. And see how your
mind will leave, while all of a sudden you
can say, hey.
It's noise, you see, when someone gets angry at you, me, when
they yell at me, it's noise.
First thing, the foam.
Second thing, the soap bubbles, the
falling rain.
Third thing.
the mirage
the perception
it's a mirage
fourth thing
and we're going to talk a little bit about that
it's the world of volition
or the world of mental factors
and we could summarize
if I really have to summarize this world of mental factors
it's summarizing
to the world of your intentions
what are my intentions
it's true
important because and I propose to you
in fact I propose to you in fact Philippe
to be aware of your intentions, hey
I'm filming or I'm going to take notes, all that
these are movements of intention because these movements there in fact it's
it's
creator of your karmic world.
And it's really important.
Before speaking, look at your intention.
If you become aware of your intentions,
you will make huge leaps.
The Buddha, he said, I made a package like that.
I put in a package on the right
my intentions that were good.
That is to say that these intentions...
which ultimately, you see, gave a good movement.
And on the left, a bit my intentions that were a little less, not quite good.
And I deleted that package.
And there, these are the seven-league boots.
Is that what they call seven-league?
These are huge leaps.
And there, the image is to understand that it's the banana tree.
it's the image of the banana tree
and you see sometimes the banana tree
like that it's a magnificent construction
and if you cut
the branch in the center of the banana tree
you know what you see
it's empty
the foam, the water, the soap bubbles
perception is the mirage
And then, the banana tree.
The last aggregate is the aggregate of consciousness.
I think I'm becoming conscious.
And there, the image, we won't talk about it, but I'll give you,
it's the image of the magician.
Of the great illusion.
It's as if at some point, one must understand that consciousness...
becomes the ultimate refuge of the ego, so
the foam, permanence, after
the foam, it was the bubbles
the sensations, the perceptions, that
that was the mirage, and then the banana tree, that
that's
abolition, the mental factors, so there we could summarize
really the intention and which is almost
primary, I give it as an order, but ultimately they are all always in fact in
superposition all these things and what is important is to reflect on them from time to time
we can sometimes do a one-week retreat on a scandal, even
sometimes a month because
you can start to go really into detail